The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gratitude
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Gratitude


Author: Roy Norton

Release date: October 23, 2023 [eBook #71939]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Street and Smith, 1913

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRATITUDE ***




                               GRATITUDE

                             By Roy Norton
         Author of “The Garden of Fate,” “The Plunderer,” Etc.


    The first of a new series of stories about the Competents in
    Alaska. The season ended, they throw their last shovelfuls
    of dirt and bid good-by to the homely cabin on the
    mountainside. But their last days on the claim were not to
    pass without adventure.

    I’ve heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
    With coldness still returning;
    Alas! The gratitude of men
    Hath oftener left me mourning.

Shakespeare George, lover of poetry, found the quotation in an old
magazine, and carefully framed and tacked it above his bunk, where, in
somber moods, he might refer to it. And the rest of us, partners in that
isolated heart of Alaska, smiled, being well aware that cynicism had no
place in his character. Sometimes, when tales of ingratitude came to his
ears, he attempted to quote it; usually after this fashion:

    “I’ve hearn of hearts unkind, them deeds
    With coolness still a-turning;
    But, Lord! The gratitude of folks
    Has most always left me busted.”

He sometimes stated that there were cases where even the poetry was
inadequate, and in particular mentioned this fact in connection with
Laughing Jim.

Jim was bad, through and through, with a thoroughness that left no cause
for mistake, and he was rendered worse by such a charm of recklessness,
bravery, and laughter, that half his misdeeds were overlooked. He laid
no claim to honesty, and with amazing, disarming truthfulness, admitted
his own shortcomings. He was a delightful story-teller, who could amuse
and interest his auditors with recountals of his varied experiences in
many jails. He was above the average in height, and as if to give the
lie to his life, had fearless, candid, laughing eyes. Perhaps it was his
sense of humor that made one doubt whether he was consciously bad, or
merely lacking in moral sense. Anyway, he laughed at everything, himself
included.

No one quite remembers when he arrived in Marook, or, at least, none
ever mentioned it. Probably he came with that inrush in the late fall of
’97, when the newly discovered Klondike sent its refugees hurrying down
the river to camps where they might be sure of supplies through the long
winter season, and he laughed his way into a job as bartender, for want
of something else to do, and then, in time, graduated to the post of
running the roulette wheel at the Hang-out. He was distinguished in
dress by having the only toothpick shoes in camp, which he always wore,
and for the excellent care he bestowed on his hands. He was popular with
those who went to the Hang-out to lose their hard-won gold dust, and set
a new pace in crying his wares.

“Come, gather round me, merry gentlemen!” he would shout, when business
languished. “Why play the bank when you can lose your money here so much
faster? Your money extracted without pain. Try the wheel! No man ever
quit me winner!”

And then he would throw back his handsome young head, and that free,
reckless laugh of his would roar out over the rumble of conversation,
the clink of bottle on glass, the persistent clacking of chips and
markers at the bank, and the clattering of dice where chuck-a-luck held
forth. My partners, known to the camp as “the Competents” Westerners
all, and all of the sober, taciturn type, were too wise in the ways of
gamedom to patronize either his or any of the other games in the
Hang-out; but when spending nights in camp they frequently went there in
lieu of other places to go, and for Shakespeare George this strange,
unmoral, laughing man formed a liking. That George did not dislike him
stood him in good stead on that night when Phil Mahoney ran amuck.

Phil had sold a claim for two thousand dollars, and Phil, ordinarily
taciturn, developed into a roaring carouser of high rank. Moreover, a
sporting tendency led him to accept Laughing Jim’s challenge and attempt
to worst that proficient at his own game. We were loitering there when
Phil, leering, trudged away from the bar to the wheel and bought chips.

“One more man’s money in the till!” shouted Jim. “Fair warning is fair
warning. Play with me long enough and I take your wad!”

“If I plays long enough,” growled Phil, seating himself and shoving a
stack of chips on the fifteen spot and sparing a few for the single and
double O.

Still voicing that deep-throated laugh, Jim raked them in, and again
asserted that all men who came to his wheel lost; but Phil, angry,
doubled his stakes, and assumed a grin. Five times in succession he
lost, and then bought more chips, and now the grin had given place to a
sullen frown.

“There’ll be trouble with that fool yet,” said George to me, “and it’ll
be his own bloomin’ fault, because he’s been warned often enough by
Jim.”

We drew closer to the table, as did several others, seeing that
Mahoney’s bets were increasing; but his exclamations of disappointment
were drowned in the babel of sound that weltered throughout the
Hang-out. Jim had begun by taunting him; but now, discovering his ill
temper, as merely the cool “wheelman,” twirling the little white ball,
and raking in the losses, or paying out the winnings. Once he objected
to something Phil said.

“What makes you play when luck’s all against you?” he demanded. “It’s
not my fault if you lose all the time, is it?”

But Phil, by this time heavily short in purse, played on with a certain
unmistakable desperation, and lost with a persistence that rapidly
depleted his bag of gold dust. Now and then he won for a few turns of
the illusive wheel, but the certain percentage of the game against him
again told, and finally he was down to his last money. He staked
everything recklessly on the old “star combination,” and Jim waited
patiently for him to place his bet, and, it seemed to me, with a faint
hope that it might be withdrawn.

“All bets down?” he demanded at last.

“Ain’t blind, are you?” was Phil’s surly response, and Jim, with a
slight shrug, twirled the ball. It hovered aimlessly for two or three
turns as the wheel slowed down, and once it threatened to fall into a
winning pocket; then, with the perversity of fortune, it slipped quietly
into a partition and lay there. For a full quarter of a minute Jim did
not touch it, nor the stakes that Phil had lost, and then he slowly
reached over and swept the table clean, and, as he did so, again vented
that slow laugh of his.

“Told you I’d get you,” he said; but in the friendliest and most
careless of tones.

Phil, who had risen to his feet as the wheel spun, stood as if
transfixed by adversity when Jim swept the last of the money into the
drawer; but his lips were drawn back into a stiff, snarling grin, and
his eyes were wild with disappointment and anger. At the sound of Jim’s
laugh he suddenly broke loose into a storm of oaths, and, almost before
any one could realize his intent, so swift was his action, he whipped a
gun from his belt and “threw it down” on the wheelman.

The quickness of Shakespeare George was, and still is, proverbial among
those who knew him up and down the long Northwestern coast. Undoubtedly,
on that evening, it was the means of saving the life of Laughing Jim;
for even as George leaped forward from the side and caught Phil’s arm,
the pistol exploded. But so sure and deft had been George’s attack, the
heavy bullet merely buried itself in one of the poles of the cabin roof,
and the pistol hand, clutched by the harsh, sinewy fingers of the miner,
waved aloft helplessly as the two men struggled backward and forward.
The roulette wheel with its table was overturned, and for a minute the
room was filled with excited men who broke forward to witness or
participate in any trouble. Quite steadily George forced Phil back
against the wall, still clutching the upraised hand, and held him there.

“Phil! Phil!” George expostulated. “What’s the matter with you--you
fool! Cut it out, I tell you!”

Other voices joined the protest, and another of the competents, Bill
Davis, reached up and twisted the gun from Phil’s hand. George released
his hold, and for a minute they stood there, angry, excited, and
gathered as if for further combat; then, slowly, Phil relaxed.

“You got a square deal, pardner, all right,” insisted Shakespeare George
with his slow drawl. “I ain’t got no use at all for gamblers or them
that plays; but we stood behind you when you commenced, and Jim told you
he’d get your money. Then he tried to get you to stop when he saw luck
was against you, and that you was gettin’ sore, and that didn’t do no
good. I ain’t right sure that, if you’d ’a’ killed him, I wouldn’t have
helped hang you. Now will you be good?”

With an impatient curse Phil shoved men out of his path and tramped
through the doorway and into the night. Some one laughed with a clear,
cool laugh, and it was Jim, the wheelman, righting his table and wheel.
Another man laughed, some one said, “The cussed fool!” There was a
return movement toward the other gambling tables, and the Hang-out had
resumed its normal atmosphere of rumbling, subdued noise, stale smells
of sweaty furs, dead smoke, and poisonous liquors.

Laughing Jim dropped the wheel back to its pivot, gave it a spin, and
looked across at Shakespeare George. His face was, for an instant, grave
and earnest.

“Close call--that!” he said quietly. “And I reckon, Mister Shakespeare
George, that I owe you one. Thanks!”

He looked down and began to adjust his chips as if words were awkward
for him under such circumstances, and then, as if to further conceal
embarrassment, or through sheer, careless hardness, he again lifted his
head and laughed, and his clear voice went out: “Everything all right
again! Still doing business at the same old stand. Come up and try your
luck, boys! Come try your luck!”

I was not certain whether mine was a sense of surprise at this callous
outburst, or one of intense disgust for the whole sordid and near-tragic
drama, as we followed the broken man out into the cold, still, starlit
night. And, so slight is our gift of prescience, I did not in the least
anticipate that this was but the opening scene for others in which
Shakespeare George, clean, homely, and capable, and Laughing Jim, bad,
attractive, and reckless, were to play parts.

The second scene was two months in coming. It was toward the very close
of the long winter season that shut us in, and infolded us, like
prisoners in a gloom of frost and ice, in the cold, yet attractive,
center of a frozen world.

We, the Competents and I, had been working with persistent industry for
weeks, and hungered for a touch of the camp and its vicissitudes; so,
one night, when the restless craving for recreation was strong upon us,
we went, slipping swiftly over the frozen trails in our moccasins,
panting up steeps, and racing down short hills between bare trees as the
dim path opened and beckoned us on.

The trail leading into the camp debouched into a cluster of cabins owned
by miners who had claims on the gulches, and these were spread,
regardless of streets, on the flat facing the river--frozen now into a
broad ribbon of ice, snow-covered, and resting like a sinuous white
blanket between the bordering hills. We passed through this clump of
black squares, snow-capped, and out to the ribbon’s edge. Bill Davis, in
the lead, stopped us with a gesture and an exclamation.

“Listen!” he said.

We did. In the profound stillness we heard voices--angry voices--as of
turbulent men. They came from down the straggling business street,
lasted for a moment, and then were again shut off, even as the shutter
of a camera, timed, permits light and then stops it.

“Must have been down at the post,” Bill said. “We heard it while the
door was open. Something doing. Let’s lope along and see.”

He set the pace, and in a few minutes we opened the door of the trading
post to find it filled with muttering men, and it was plain to us that a
miner’s meeting, irregular and hurried, perhaps, but nevertheless a
miner’s meeting, was in session. Men in mackinaws, furs, and parkas were
crowded into the place, and the dim lamps, with their tin reflectors,
betrayed angry faces. Phil Mahoney was standing on the rough counter
haranguing the men, and his face was black with excitement and temper.

“And look what he did to me!” he shouted, just as we entered. “Skinned
me out of all I had, then laughed in my face. And it only took him ten
or fifteen minutes to do it. They ain’t no square game could do it. He’s
a crook! That’s what this Jim is! Why, he says so himself, and laughs
about it. This camp’s had too much of him. He’s busted too many men. I
move we go down and get him and start him over the ice, to-night! Now!”

Despite the small esteem in which I held Laughing Jim, a shudder rippled
up my spine at the thought of such an execution; for it meant nothing
less. To “start a man over the ice,” meant that he would be sent without
blankets, or food, and that, with a full eighty miles to Taninaw, the
nearest point of succor, meant nothing save condemnation to slow death
by cold or exhaustion.

“Hold on! Hold on, a minute, before that’s put to a vote,” I heard
Shakespeare George demand.

Men turned and craned their necks to look at him as he crowded toward
the counter and into the little, open space reserved beneath it for
courtesy.

“Me and my pardners just got here,” said George, “and we’d like to know
what Jim’s done this time.”

“Done?” shouted Phil, rendered more angry by interference. “He’s skinned
Missouri Jones out of all he had, and then won his pay dump from him.
Ain’t that enough?”

George eyed Phil steadily, and took his time to answer.

“Why did Missouri go against him?” he demanded. “Ain’t he old enough,
and wise enough, to know that he can’t beat a wheel?”

“But the wheel’s crooked!” declared Phil, his very beard bristling with
excitement.

“Humph! You don’t know that, and I don’t,” retorted George. “Until it’s
proved that it is, I’ll not vote to kill a man. That’s what it amounts
to. You all know it.”

There was an instant’s silence that gave way to murmurs of approval,
angry protests, and argument, above which rose Phil’s voice, high and
shrill, demanding the question. George fought for more time, and begged
men to consider carefully before voting; but the clamor drowned him at
last, and the chairman put the motion to a vote by counting hands. There
was a sudden silence, portentous, as it took place, and I looked around
me at the hard or cruel faces of men whose hands were uplifted in the
death sign, and heard the steady, solemn voice of the chairman counting:
“One--two--three----” and so on, up to “twenty-seven.”

When the call for those opposed came, my hand, with those of the
Competents, was held high, and with restrained breath we again listened
to the tally. Slowly and more slow, it approached the end, and stopped
at identically the same number. Three or four men, loudest of whom was
Phil Mahoney, began shouting arguments; but were silenced by the
chairman, who calmly stated that for purposes of certainty he would ask
for another vote. Again trying moments passed and the result was the
same. Quite deliberately the chairman got to his feet on the counter,
and held up his hand.

“It rests with me to cast the deciding vote,” he said, and we all leaned
forward in suspense and stared at him. His face was firm, and his voice
without a tremor as he spoke. He was a brave man, was that chairman,
standing there, dominant, before more than half a hundred earnest men!

“Shakespeare George,” he said, “has convinced me that we are in possible
danger of condemning a man who, though his business is questionable, and
his character confessedly loose, may be innocent of crookedness in the
cases before this meeting. I therefore cast the deciding vote against
sending him out over the ice, and declare the meeting open for any
further business, or a motion to adjourn.”

Instantly the room was in a tumult that the chairman could not quell.
Above the clamor, I heard Phil Mahoney shouting; “To thunder with such a
vote! Come on, boys! Meeting or no meeting, we’ll get that thief! All
that’s with me, come on!”

I felt a sudden jerk at my arm that almost overthrew me, and saw that it
was George’s hand that had seized me.

“Quick! Outside!” he shouted in my ear, and plunged toward the door.

As a flying wedge the Competents, accustomed for many years to fighting
together, quick, sinewy, big, and powerful men all, charged to the door,
jerked it open, and drew themselves together in front of it, a grim
little line of determination. The moon had risen to cast shadows at the
foot of the trees on the white, still snow, and shadows at the feet of
our pitifully thin line; but we were tensed and waiting for the rush. As
the foremost men belched from the door they halted in surprise, for
directly before them stood Shakespeare George with a heavy, menacing
gun, held at the hip, and pointed toward them.

“Stop!” he ordered, and there was something so chill and commanding in
his voice that men paused irresolutely; then, sensing the deadliness of
the situation, obeyed.

“The meeting in there fairly voted down any action against Laughing
Jim,” George said quietly. “My pardners and I stand for law and order.
The majority is still the law in this camp, and if it comes to a
show-down, we, my pardners and I, will furnish the order! There’ll be no
rush on Laughing Jim so long as any of us can handle his gun. If you
think you can put it over, men, try it on!”

His grim conclusion was not to go unchallenged; for when he ceased, Phil
Mahoney leaped to the front, waving his arms and shouting an appeal to
his followers to pay no heed. Before he had uttered a dozen words George
leaped. The long barrel of his pistol flew into the air, and came
crashing sidewise against Phil’s head, and the disturber fell to the
snow, stricken as is an animal beneath the blow of a pole-ax.

Even as he fell, George’s voice, cold and drawling, steady and distinct,
queried: “Who’s next?”

There was no “next.” I found myself the only unarmed one from our camp,
leaning forward on tiptoes, with fists clenched, and the expectant lust
of battle ripping through my veins as I saw them waver, saw other men
line themselves back of us ready for combat, and witnessed, as the long
seconds flew, the dissolution of Phil Mahoney’s forces. At the time it
seemed that hours were passing; but that entire change of sentiment
could not have required more than five minutes, and then there arose the
murmur: “George is right, boys! The meeting decided it! That settles
it!” and all was over.

The strange character of Shakespeare George was never better exemplified
than in his following action, and thinking of the events of that
far-fled night, I sometimes smile at his conception of “law and order”;
for when it was certain that the mob spirit was quelled and dissipated,
he slipped the gun back into its worn holster and whispered to us, his
partners: “Come on, boys! I’ve got something else we ought to do,” and
trudged away. The door of the trading post slammed as old Mayo swore at
the loiterers and asserted that he had no contract to warm all outdoors.
Black-moving spots were here and there on the white-covered earth as
groups turned toward their cabins, moving quickly to escape the nipping
teeth of the air.

Wondering what George could have in mind, we followed him, for with us
it was custom to cling together, come what might. Straight he led us to
the Hang-out, and in through the door. Already Laughing Jim was the
center of a garrulous group, and his face for once was grave. As we
entered he broke away from those who retailed to him the narrowness of
his escape, and came toward George, admiring, reluctant, yet evidently
anxious to voice his gratitude. But George’s brows drew themselves into
a scowl, and his gray-blue eyes were cold and sharp as he looked at the
man whose life he had most certainly saved for a second time.

“Put on your coat,” he said, “and come outside for a minute. We want to
talk to you, Jim.”

Again we followed him out as we saw that Jim, his young face depicting
curiosity, was turning over his cash drawer to the bartender, and
looking for his mackinaw. We had but a minute to wait before he emerged,
and no time at all to speculate over George’s intentions.

“I’ve saved you to-night, for the second time,” was our partner’s terse
statement.

Jim started to thank him, but George threw up his hand, demanding
attention.

“So you owe me something, and you’ll pay! Jim, your game’s done as far
as this camp’s concerned.”

Again the wheelman opened his lips as if to speak, and again was
abruptly silenced.

“We’ll have no powwow,” declared George, scowling at him, as he stood
there in the moonlight. “But you’ll do this! You’ll walk back into the
Hang-out and announce that never again in this camp will you roll a
wheel or turn a card; that you’re through; that you’ve finished! Then
you’ll wait for the first chance to go down, or up, the river when
spring comes, and--Jim--you’ll go!”

“But----” objected Jim.

“I said you’d go!” was the quick assertion. “There are a bunch of us
here, pardners all, who say that you’ll go as I say, quit to-night, and
go as soon as you can. And it’s up to you where you go. Up the river to
Dawson, down to St. Michaels, or----”

Significantly the thumb of his mitten turned toward the earth, and Jim
understood. The shadows on the snow, sharp and defined, nodded their
heads in assent, and the gambler looked from man to man, reading in
those dim faces a sentence. It was characteristic of him that after this
quick appraisement he drew a deep breath, looked out across the broad
expanse of snow-clad river, up at the flaming skies, and then laughed,
deeply, recklessly, and shrugged his shoulders. Also it was
characteristic that he turned toward the door, and said: “Good! Come
ahead and see if I can’t play any game!”

Once inside he walked unhesitatingly to the rough bar, seized a cigar
cutter that rested thereon, and banged it loudly on the pine boards.
Every one in the room paused and turned toward him, men’s faces, dim
through the smoke, expressing open-mouthed curiosity.

“Men,” said Jim, when he had their full attention, “I’ve been accused of
turning a crooked game. It isn’t so. I’ve played it fair, but had rare
good luck. I owe Shakespeare George a debt. I’m paying it, full and
square. And to pay it, and be quits with a clean slate, he demands that
I play no more--any game--in Marook. It costs me a lot, for you’re a
bunch of easy marks--suckers--with gold dust! But I pay! From this
minute, now, I play nothing, gamble nothing in this camp, and am done!”

The surprised silence following this strange assertion was broken by his
big, hearty laugh, and the banging of his emphatic fist on the bar.
Quite mockingly he backed away from George, doffed his hat, brought his
heels together, and bowed deeply.

“I’ve made good,” he said. “Othello’s occupation’s gone! But God speed
the spring so that he may find other fields to conquer!”

And he backed away, down the open space in front of the bar, and out of
the door, while George’s face lighted with sudden interest at the sound
of the double quotation.

“That’s from the third act and the third scene,” said George
delightedly, as if he had made a great discovery. And then: “It means
that he’s lost his job! That’s the place where Othello talks about the
dread clamorous counterfeiters. That Jim’s a scholar! That’s what he
is--a scholar.”

It was not the fear of enmities that kept us away from the camp on the
banks of the Yukon in the weeks that followed that night, but the
demands of work. Slowly the disappointment had come to us that our
claims were not of the best, and that only by continuous effort could we
hope to make them pay scant profit. Save on occasions when some of them
passed on the trail we saw nothing of the men of Marook or Laughing Jim.
Once we heard that the latter had complained that George had kept him
from reaping the profits of the camp, and again that, loafing on the
outer edge of his gambling world, he had angrily sworn that if he had
been left undisturbed he would have made his fortune. I suppose there
was some truth in his statement. Yet he held to his word, this unmoral,
reckless vagabond who laughed. They said that he was still there,
wearing, despite derision, his pointed-toed shoes, and manicuring his
nails; but gambling not at all.

And so, at last, the sun found us, and burst glaring upon our
activities, and thawed the huge black dumps, and melted the snow,
devoting all his energy of the high latitudes throughout the long days.
Water streamed from the hillsides. Every brook was a torrent, every snow
bank the repository for the continuous, melodious chorus of tinkling
water drops as they dripped and dripped, and sang their little good-by
songs. The dams were built, the gates swung up and down, the shovels
tore into the pay dumps, and the sluice boxes roared as we men of Little
Marook strove, and cleaned up our winter’s profit, be it large or small.
Gone was the whine of the windlass in the frosty air, gone the sound of
belabored arms beating heavy chests in the struggle to keep warm. Gone
was the ring of the ax, the clatter of buckets emptying their contents
on the apex of pyramids. The air was redolent with the call of wild fowl
come to the breeding ground, the chirping of migratory birds, and the
noiseless hum of insects.

“Boys,” said Bill Davis on the night we cleaned up the last of our pay
dirt, “I figure that she runs about fifteen thousand dollars, at
eighteen an ounce. Not much, but a mighty sight better than nothing.”

As he talked, he poured the dust into one of our half-filled buckskin
sacks, and dropped it into our safe deposit--an empty oil can. Then,
heaving a tired sigh, he slid the can under the bunk. On the morrow we
would pick up the last scant remnants, pull the sluices, and divide this
mass of gold into packs for the next day’s journey to the post trader at
the camp. Our season’s work was done. As claims went in that country,
and in proportion to the cost of living, we had not prospered; but we
had more than paid our way and were glad; for, long before, we had
decided to sell the claim and go “outside”--to the real United
States--for the summer season. We went to sleep with the cabin door
open, now that spring had come, and I remember that the last feature I
observed was the lengthening of the daylight.

Full of the desire of youth for rest, I awoke only when Tim shouted his
call for breakfast, and tumbled sleepily to my clothing, to the
washbasin outside the door, and my seat at the table. Then, a gallant
company, we sallied down for our last day’s work on the claim. And we
made merry over it, this last day, and played pranks, and loitered, and
threw the last shovelfuls with something of regret, for we were leaving
the ground that had promised much, paid something, and was to be
bartered. It was like bidding good-by to a friend, when we took the last
pan of dust we would ever “clean up” from it, and filed toward the
homely cabin on the mountainside. George put the pan on top of the stove
to dry, for we used no amalgam; and Tim, whose week it was to cook, put
the supper before us. We ate with something of melancholy, some queer
mingling of good-by regret and satisfaction that at least we had worked
as men. Tim got up at last and caught the pan in his hands with a strip
of cloth, and reached under the bunk for the can. We heard an
exclamation, first of surprise, and then alarm, as he pulled it out from
beneath the bunk, clattering hollowly.

“Robbed! By heavens! Some one’s looted us!”

His voice arose in a queer crescendo of astonishment and indignation.
Stools were thrust back and our feet trampled heavily over the floor as
we bent above him and stared down at the empty can, disbelieving him and
our senses. It was true. The can was empty, and the profits of our
year’s toil had vanished as if by malignant magic. We started toward the
door foolishly intent on plunging out into the night, but Bill Davis,
veteran of the trails, leaped in front of us and threw up a restraining
hand.

“Easy, boys! Easy does it,” he said quietly, and we paused, looking at
him expectantly, and wondering what he had in mind.

“Our only chance,” he said, “of learning how, or by whom it was taken,
is the sign out here in the mud. Whoever got it left a track. If we run
over it in the night, it will be wiped out. If we wait until morning the
sign will be there, some place; unless the man that robbed us had
wings.”

“Right for you!” was a chorus, growled in unison.

And so we all remained in the cabin, and sat and talked, and waited for
daybreak, and indulged in idle speculation, but there was no
lamentation.

It was George’s wholesome, kindly hand that crept over on mine, as we
sat there in the gloom, and it was his kindly voice that said: “Don’t
worry, boy! It hits you harder than us, because we’ve money outside.
Alaska to us was an adventure. To you it was the first step on the big
stairs of life, for you are young, but we’ll get him yet. It’s part of
the game that we should.”

And I was comforted thereby, and asleep when some one aroused us in the
morning. I tumbled from my bunk, astonished by the sudden knowledge that
I had slept in all my clothing, and that I had not suffered a wickedly
troublesome dream. Tim was up and pouring coffee, hot and steaming, into
the tin cups, and the day was breaking over the eastern hills in the
early hour of the morning, so swift is the sun’s reappearance in that
high clime. We ate and drank sparsely, quietly, each intent on what the
signs might show, and deliberately, nay, almost leisurely, tightened our
belts and went out of the door, George in the lead, Tim, short and
stocky, bending behind him like an unleashed hound, and Bill, huge and
grim, following.

It was a foregone conclusion that the robber had done one of two
things--approached from behind the cabin in the daylight, while we were
working, or crept stealthily in at night while we were asleep. In the
latter case he had doubtless fled down the trail. In the former he would
have retreated by the rear of the cabin, and out into the screen of the
forest on the mountainside above. So, first, we inspected the trail.
Veterans in reading signs were these men who had permitted me to share
their lot, and they walked forward with keen eyes sweeping this way and
that--eyes which nothing could escape. A broken twig, a patch of
crushed, indented moss, anything unusual, would be observed and noted.
They bade me walk behind, and scanned the ground for a hundred yards
before one of them uttered a sound. Then George straightened up, and I
saw the hurt look on his face give way to an angry scowl, and saw him
swing one ponderous fist into a palm.

“Come here,” he said, with strange repression, and we joined him.

There, plainly imprinted in the mud, where some one had entered the
trail from a moss-carpeted side, were tracks, and they were those of one
who wore shoes--shoes of civilization, such as but few men wore in our
outskirt of a rough world, and the shoes were pointed, delicately,
foppishly, almost daintily.

We lifted our heads and stared at one another, with the same unvoiced
comment leaping from our eyes. We looked again at the telltale tracks in
the mud, clearly leading down the hillside to the gulch below, and thus
off toward the camp. We lifted our heads once more and George spoke.

“Laughing Jim!” he said.

“No other man in all the country wore such shoes!” Tim added.

“And no one but an expert crook would have taken a chance in coming into
our cabin night before last,” suggested Bill.

“That’s when the trick was turned,” declared George. “And he has paid
me--gratitude!”

We passed, peering, down the trail and out into the gulch. Straight down
it we went, finding here and there, in the slow miles, that unusual
mark, the mark of a toothpick shoe in a country where all men wore
rubber boots or mukluks in the wet and soggy spring. There could have
been but one destination for those feet, so, at last, we wasted no more
time on signs, but strode hurriedly and angrily away toward Marook. We
gained the top of the hill in the pass above the town and looked down.
Where last we had seen the ribbon of white, was now open water. The
river had broken and cleared itself of ice while we toiled over our
dumps. It ran below us, a turgid flood. Down in front of the A. C.
Trading Post men were assembled, and they fired guns and shouted, while
dogs ran hither and yon, howling a chorus of excitement and salute for
the first steamboat of the year. It was coming slowly toward the bank, a
tiny, rough affair that had wintered in a slough up the river. We
hurried onward toward the water front, and had small need to ask
questions, inasmuch as the first one was answered.

“Has any one seen Laughing Jim lately?” demanded George of the group in
front of the Hang-out.

“If you’re looking for him, you’re a trifle late,” jocularly asserted
the nearest man. “He pulled out yesterday mornin’ in a boat, goin’ down
the river. And he seemed in a hurry; but he stopped to laugh and twiddle
his thumb at his nose to the boys who saw him go, and said he was right
sorry he hadn’t had a chance to skin the whole blamed camp before he set
sail. Ha! Ha! Ha!”

He laughed boisterously at his own joke, a laugh in which we did not
join, for now we knew, indubitably, that Jim had sufficient reason for
haste. It was Bill, slow and cautious, who asked another question,
pertinent to our quest.

“Any one else gone from the camp?” he asked.

“Nope! No one else had any reason to be in a rush,” was the response.

“What makes you think Jim was in a hurry?” asked George, frowning at the
man.

“Because he just dumped himself, and some blankets, and grub into a
canoe that belonged to an Injun, and paddled away as if he was out to
break records,” asserted our informant. “Somebody asked him what was his
rush, and he said he had a new job that he must move fast to grab. Cute
of him, wasn’t it? He was a smart son of a gun, all right, and would
have his little joke, right up to the last.”

Again the man laughed, and then, as the steamboat was about to land,
hurriedly left us and started toward the river bank.

Bill beckoned us to one side.

“Boys,” he said, “we’ve got just one chance, and that is to get to St.
Michaels as soon as he does. Unimak Pass probably isn’t clear of ice
yet, and he will have to lay there until the steamer can get in from
outside to take him away. We’ve got to try to catch him between here and
there, and we’ve got several hundred miles to do it in. Two of us better
rustle a boat. The others arrange for some one to keep an eye on our
cabin up in the gulch, and buy grub for a cruise. Then it’s a case of
work at the oars and make time. Let’s get a move on ourselves.”

We did, most effectually, and in just two hours’ time were shoving a
crude, whipsawed skiff out into the river, and feeling the current catch
us and sweep us toward the Ramparts below. We had begun the grim chase
to overtake the one man who had paid his toll of gratitude by robbing
the man who had twice saved his life, and it was certain that, did we
overtake him, this time there would be no escape; for we would bring him
back for trial.

The current helped us, and, to our satisfaction, we discovered that the
apparently clumsy skiff handled excellently and responded bravely to our
steady oars. We tore through the Ramparts where the waters lashed the
rocks, and out into the breadths below, and then set ourselves to our
task, as we traveled through that great uninhabited country. Save for
the flying fowl, and a bear that lazily paused from drinking on a
distant shore, we saw no living thing, and we did not pause for
luncheon, but took turns with the oars. Accustomed as we were to the
heaviest work, and in the perfect physical condition that comes from
healthful food and clean lives, we did not suffer from the prolonged
exertion. Indeed, had our mission been less melancholy and desperate, I,
for one, would have enjoyed that steady, rhythmic motion, the gurgling
of the water under our bow, the ever-changing scenery at our sides, and
the beauties of a perfect day. We did not talk much, but once or twice
Shakespeare George, brooding, quoted as if to himself, in a bitter tone,
his own version of Wordsworth’s “Gratitude.”

What would have been evening in a more southerly latitude came on, and
found us still rowing with that same measured stroke, save that we took
shorter turns at the oars, and found the resting spells more grateful.
The current carried us closer toward a shore, around a point that seemed
blanketed with the evening’s purple haze, and we stopped rowing abruptly
at the sound of a rifle shot. Nestled at the foot of a bluff was a
squalid little Indian village, and the natives were running excitedly up
and down the water’s edge and waving to us. It was evident that the shot
had been fired to attract our attention. We headed the boat toward them,
and they caught our prow and pulled us up on the shingle before we could
protest.

“Come! Quick come!” urged a withered, kindly faced old native,
presumably the tyune of this little domain. “White man ’most _peluck_!
Him soon die. Quick come!”

We hastened after him to the big Kazima, a sort of clubhouse which each
village of any size possesses, crawled in after him, and when our eyes
grew accustomed to the dull, smoke-blackened, raftered interior, lighted
only by a huge hole in the upper center over the fire pit through which
the soft daylight streamed, we stood above the cause of his solicitude.
Our chase was ended; for on the skins, at our feet, lay Laughing Jim.

George knelt beside him, and ran his hand inside the blue shirt that was
torn open across the chest, and then looked up at us.

“Somethin’s happened to him,” he said, “feels to me as if he was all
shot to pieces.”

At the sound of his voice Laughing Jim opened his eyes a little wildly,
then smiled as recognition crept into their clear, but pain-drawn,
depths.

“I’m going,” he croaked, with a queer, gasping effort. “You got here
just in time. I--I---- Drink!”

Bill Davis pulled our little emergency flask from his pocket, George
lifted the wounded man up, and gave him a strong sup of the brandy, and
it momentarily strengthened him. All our animosity was forgotten now, as
we stood there rubbing shoulders with death, such is the queer awe and
pity that assails us at sight of the mortally stricken regardless of
their merits.

“Who did it, Jim?” asked George, still supporting the dying man’s
shoulders and head.

“Mahoney. But I got him! He’s over there!”

He rolled his eyes toward the dark corner of the Kazima, and with
exclamations of surprise all of us, save George, hurried to the corner,
struck matches, and looked. There lay Phil Mahoney, beyond all aid,
dead. I threw my handkerchief over his face before we went back to
George and Jim, on tiptoe, as if the sound of our footsteps on that
beaten earth would ever matter to him. We gave Jim another draft of the
brandy, and he feebly waved for silence.

“Let me talk,” he said. “Not much time left. Been going out all day.
I’ve never been any good. Gambler’s habit of sleeping days, awake
nights. Took walk yesterday morning. Wanted to get close to birds and
hear ’em sing. Mile above camp. Saw Phil Mahoney toting something toward
boat. Acted queer. Didn’t see me. Got in boat and shoved off. Skirted
opposite shore as if afraid being seen. ‘Funny,’ says I. ‘Wonder what
that big, ugly devil’s up to?’ Forgot all about it and went back to my
cabin, to clean up. Couldn’t find best shoes. Cussed some, and wondered
what Siwash could have swiped them. Then, all of sudden, remembered
Mahoney walked queer. So I----”

He stopped and his lithe, wounded body was twisted with a harsh cough
that threatened to undo him, and again we gave him brandy. After a time,
but in a weaker and more broken voice, he went on: “So I went back.
Never trusted him, anyhow. Sure enough there were tracks in the mud. He
had ’em on. I back-tracked him. Found thicket of pussy willows, and
inside of it empty gold sacks. Special buck. You fellows’ names on ’em
in indelible pencil. Got wild! Ran back farther along tracks and saw he
must have come from gulch trail--your direction. Saw it all in a minute.
Saw you fellows wouldn’t believe me, because you know I’ve been a bad
one--sometimes--not always. Maybe not so bad as some. Only thing I could
do to show you I wasn’t a dog, and appreciated what you all had done for
me, was to catch thief. Grabbed canoe and chased him. Caught him here,
where he’d stopped to make tea, above village. Saw smoke. Found
boat--nothing in it. Crept up on him. He had gold dust with him. Tried
to get drop on him, but he was too quick. Whirled and shot.”

He rested silently for a moment as if to gather strength, and there was
a little, exultant gleam in his eyes as he continued:

“I was down. Played fox. ‘That’s all right!’ says he, as he came up and
stood over me, ‘but I’d rather you’d been hanged by them Competents.’
Then he laughed and turned back. I got to my elbow and shot. He went
down. Then we shot from the ground, and luck was against me. Could feel
every one of his hit. Didn’t know any more till Indians came running and
picked me up. Phil was dead. Made natives bring me here with your dust.
Told ’em better bring Phil, too, so if I went out, and you came, you’d
understand.”

He coughed again, more violently, and the brandy seemed to have lost its
effect. He motioned with his dying fingers toward his side, and we had
to bend over to catch his whispered words:

“It’s there--by me--all of it--and--and--George, you’re white and--I’m
not so bad--after all--am I? Wanted you boys to know that----”

As if the severing of soul and body had given him an instant’s strength,
he half stiffened, struggled, and then tried to laugh, a ghastly
semblance of that reckless, full-throated laugh that had given him his
sobriquet, twitched, gasped, seemed to abruptly relax, and rested very
still.

“Right? You’re right as rain! You are! God knows you are!”

George shouted the words to him as if speeding them out to overtake his
parting soul, and I like to remember that Laughing Jim’s eyes seemed to
twitch and that he went out with a smile on his face.

Side by side we buried them there, close to where the babble of the
Yukon might croon to them in the long summers, or display to the cold
skies its beaten winter trails, Phil Mahoney, the thief, in his stolen
shoes, and Laughing Jim, the strange admixture of evil and nobility. And
over each, with equal forgiveness, we put a rude wooden cross, while
curious, stolid natives stood quietly by. The sole distinction we made
was that the cross above Jim was carefully hewn. But George lingered
behind as we made our preparations to camp in the village for the night,
and the next morning, still filled with the tragedy, I slipped back up
the hillside for a last look at the graves. On that of Laughing Jim, who
would laugh no more, lay a handful of dying wild flowers, and I saw
scrawled on the cross, in the handwriting of Shakespeare George, these
words:

    Under here is Laughing Jim. Paid a little favor with his life,
    And died with a laugh on his lips! Bad as he was, better’n
    Most of us, and provin’ that sometimes even poets is wrong, and
    That men don’t forget. Lord help us all to do as well.

And so we left him, and my eyes were fixed, as we rowed back up the
river, and the village with its natives was lost to view, on the
rough-hewn cross that seemed to blaze with a peculiar glory all its own,
a shining standard for one honorably dead on the field of gratitude.

[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the December 1, 1913 issue
of The Popular Magazine.]




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRATITUDE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


